
## Rules for orthographic transcription (long)

1.  Include words/phrases even if they are repeated or part of revisions

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “she was not, I mean, she was going to go to the ball”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: she was not, I mean, she was going to go to the ball

</div>

2.  Include the standard version of nonstandard productions

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “she finna bust up outta there because she hasta be
    home by midnight”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: she fixing to bust up out of there because she has to be
    home by midnight

</div>

Non standard and standard productions

| NONSTANDARD      | STANDARD   | NONSTANDARD  | STANDARD           |
|------------------|------------|--------------|--------------------|
| coulda(ve)       | could have | lemme        | let me             |
| dunno            | don’t know | lotsa        | lots of            |
| dyou             | do you     | mighta       | might have         |
| finna, fixin’ to | fixing to  | need(t)a     | need to            |
| gimme            | give me    | oughta       | ought to           |
| gonna            | going to   | (s)posta(ve) | supposed to (have) |
| gotchya          | got you    | sorta        | sort of            |
| gotta            | got to     | wanna        | want to            |
| hadta            | had to     | wassup       | what’s up          |
| hasta            | has to     | whaddya      | what did you       |
| hafta            | have to    | whyddya      | why did you        |
| kinda            | kind of    | whyntcha     | why didn’t you     |

3.  Include words with non-typical sounds (e.g., slurred, distorted) and
    type as the target word as long as it is recognizable/intelligible

4.  Include words with sound errors (substitutions, omissions,
    phonological errors, etc.) as long as the target is
    recognizable/intelligible with context and more than 50% of phonemes
    are correct.

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “and she rode off with the pɪnts \[: prince\]”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: and she rode off with the prince

</div>

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “troll child in tɛptʃɪldrɪn \[: stepchildren\]”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: troll child in stepchildren

</div>

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “wanted to doe \[: go\] to dance”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: wanted to go to dance

</div>

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “she /pʌz/ \[: was\] (gestures to face, talking about
    Cinderella) a pretty curl \[: girl\]”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: she was a pretty girl

</div>

5.  Exclude part-words, false starts, sounds/syllables produced as a
    participant attempts to say a word

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “and ~~dr- dr-~~ beautiful”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: and beautiful

</div>

6.  Exclude neologisms (less than 50% of phonemes correct)

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “and she mades \[: made\] her all ~~/prudɪsbʊl/ \[:
    beautiful\]~~”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: and she mades her all

</div>

7.  Exclude fillers – meaningless non-words such as “uh”, “um”, “er”.
    Some real words may serve a filler function – e.g., to stall while
    thinking of what to say – but for the sake of reliability, leave
    them in the transcript. These may include words/phrases like “you
    know”, “like”, “so”, “okay”, etc.

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “~~um~~, okay, so then she went off with the, ~~uh~~,
    the prince”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: okay so then she went off with the the prince

</div>

8.  Exclude information/words/phrases/sentences spoken by the clinician
    or assessor. You are only focusing on the participant. If working
    from a .cha file or other file with a line for clinician/assessor
    utterances, ignore.

9.  Exclude utterances prompted by the clinician.

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “C: Did someone find it? P: The prince found it I
    think. C: Did he keep her shoe or did he do something? P: He
    gave it to her.”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: ~~C: Did someone find it? P: The prince found it I think.
    C: Did he keep her shoe or did he do something? P: He gave it to
    her~~

</div>

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “P: And they lived. C: happily… P: Ever after.”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: P: And they lived. ~~C: happily… P: Ever after.~~

</div>

### Segmenting Utterances

Separate utterances by periods. Follow utterance segmentation rules
below, adapted from CHAT Transcription Training/AphasiaBank – “In
general, an utterance can be defined as a segment of running speech that
appears to form a coherent unit (Saffran et al., 1989). When in doubt,
err on the side of creating shorter rather than longer utterances. The
following indicators are recommended, with primary weight given to
syntax and intonation:

-   Syntax – Unless there are strong prosodic counter-indications, a
    well-formed sentence is considered to be an utterance. However, an
    utterance may not necessarily be grammatically correct to be
    considered an utterance.

-   Intonation – Falling intonation (or rising intonation in the case of
    a question) suggests the end of an utterance.

-   Pauses – Pauses may not be a reliable guide to utterance boundaries.
    When pauses occur in what appear to be otherwise well-formed
    utterances, disregard them.

-   Semantics – Semantic criteria cannot be stringently applied in
    marking utterance boundaries in this population.”

### Examples with multiple rules

1.  Rules 1 & 5

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “~~um /tʃɛkdɜ˞dɪm/ \[: potentially ”stepchildren”\]~~
    wanted to go ball”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: wanted to go ball

</div>

Rationale: um deleted because filler (rule 1); neologism deleted
(rule 5)

2.  Rules 2, 1, & 3

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “she ~~um~~ she and ~~um dr- dr-~~ beautiful”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: she she and beautiful

</div>

Rationale: both of the “she”’s retained (rule 2); um deleted because
filler (rule 1); part words (dr- dr-) deleted (rule 3)

3.  Rules 1, 2, 5, 6, & 7

<div style="color: #00008b;">

-   Original: “she wanna doe \[: go\] to dance with king, I mean
    pɪnts \[: prince\], but I dunno,  that witch ~~stomɪst \[:
    potentially ”stepmother”\]~~was ~~um~~ not, she was mean”

</div>

<div style="color: green;">

-   Final: she want to go to dance with king I mean prince but I
    don’t know, that witch was not, she was mean

</div>

Rationale: um deleted because filler (rule 1); “was not, she was”
retained because revisions included (rule 2); neologism that was
potentially “stepmother” excluded because neologism (rule 5); words
recognizable in context that matched more than 50% phonemes included
(go, prince) (rule 6);  nonstandard words (wanna, dunno) rewritten
as standard words (rule 7)
